#The role of the creative agent

*Dave Jackson*

##The global Network Society
It’s no great secret that the emergence and normalization of the internet represents an unprecedented inflection point in human history. A titan mutation of social evolution that dwarfs even the Renaissance in the scale and penetration of its impact. In so many ways we’re only just beginning to understand the depth of its reach and the power of its arm. And as the next few billion get wired up to the neural network of the world wide web, this titan of change will grow ever bolder at an ever increasing rate. Not only is this an inflection point in human history but it is also a significant inflection point in the universes experimentation in attempting to know and understand itself better.  The convergence of a number of inflection points at this unique junction in history are presenting humanity with an opportunity to intervene directly and influence the setting of a new path dependency. 

It’s perhaps less widely recognized that we are living in the shadow of a 2nd parallel powerhouse of change that promises to deliver social emancipation on a scale that we’ve not experienced since the Agriculture revolution. Exponential technology is a description given to any of the technologies that are riding the wave of Moore’s law or enjoying equivalent exponential efficiency improvements. Moore’s law states that computing power is doubling in capacity and halving in cost roughly every 18 months, leading to an exponential rate of improvement in capacity, output and price performance. Examples of technologies that are hanging ten on the Moore’s law Malibu or enjoying equivalent improvements are: Energy retention; 3D Printing; Digital medicine; Artificial intelligence; Data processing; Data storage; Network systems and the Internet of things and Robotics to name a few.  

The internet alone is a titan of change but when combined with the transformational powerhouse being enabled by exponential technologies the effect is an evolutionary mutation of social architecture that is more magnificent than any before it. A tsunami of decentralized disruption is coming and a new social architecture is emergent from it – the global Network Society. 

##The Renaissance
From Constantine to Copernicus the evolution of social architecture was suffocated by the suppression of information. With the fall of Constantinople in 1453, Greco-Roman social evolution was allowed to breathe again and picked up where it left off over a thousand years before.  The flame of the Renaissance was fuelled by new access to old information. After a thousand years in captivity the dangerous ideas and knowledge of the classical Greeks was irrepressible. Texts like the poem of Lucretious reignited ancient discussions about the human condition, encouraging previously disgraced Epicurean behavior while technical manuscripts by the likes of Euclid and Archimedes helped to unlock and empower the genius of the likes of Leonardo Da Vinci.

The Renaissance was an information revolution, a period that saw the birth of the modern sciences, the printing press and dangerous new philosophies that placed individual, self confident, masters of their own destiny at the center of societal values. Like the renaissance, the internet is an information revolution, but this one is unlike any that have come before it. The internet garnishes all of the accumulated knowledge of all of humanity and serves it up to anyone with an appetite. The possibilities are limitless and if the heroes of the renaissance were here with the same opportunities they would be obese. The internet in its current form is the incubating embryo of the new network society, society is about to give birth to a new social architecture that is really just the beginning for the human race. All of social evolution up until this point has been a great effort to give birth to a global social architecture. 

##Inevitability of the internet 
On a large enough time scale, it’s possible to construct an argument that social evolution is a negentropic system of optimization towards a predictable maximum. A very simple definition of social evolution is the gradual development of society and social forms, institutions, etc. The departure point of social evolution or the minimum optimization of the system herein described is a system comprised of individual and separate social architecture’s of 1. In this architecture the single agent behaves only according to their own self-interest, in any given moment their actions are governed by motivations and constraints that are unique to them as individuals, not unlike a gas molecule with no constraints. Separate agents don’t share any motivations or constraints and the result is a high level of selfish or spiteful behavior. As social evolution has progressed it appears to have followed underlying laws that propel it to an optimized state as a system. As a system it seems to be moving away from this minimum to a logical maximum, i.e. a global social architecture in which all of the individual agents share at least some of the same motivations and constraints under a single social architecture. A brush stroke of history helps to give a sense for these underlying laws.

An example of a mutation in social evolution was the Agriculture revolution. The domestication of animals, new knowledge about grains and harvests and an improved understanding of the seasons gave humans greater control over their environment. This new knowledge and the following behavior resulted in an urban manifestation of centralized resource ownership, management and access – The City State. This mutation brought a greater number of individual agents into contact with one another in an increasingly interdependent emerging social architecture. In this new architecture individual agents were governed by a higher percentage of shared motivations and constraints than had been the case in the tribal architecture of the past, giving rise to statistically more mutually beneficial behavior. Also, previously separate tribal architectures were integrated into a new larger architecture. Selfish and spiteful behavior certainly didn’t disappear but it’s possible to construct an argument that at least one law of social evolution is built on some degree of increased interdependency resulting in more mutually beneficial behavior built on shared motivations and constraints as it appears to be a common feature of all of the major lasting mutations.   

The industrial era gave birth to a transport and communication revolution on a scale never seen before by the human race. This dramatic improvement in the capacity for mobility and communication between individual agents and separate architectures increased their access to one another over a larger area. Emergent out of this increase in accessibility was an even larger social architecture that integrated previously separate City States. This new architecture was the Nation State. During the Nation State era an even greater number of individual agents have had an increased percentage of shared motivations and constraints including factors such as laws and currencies that are common across large areas but not yet common throughout the world.  

Another way of iterate the optimization being described here is to say that the system is improving toward a mathematically ‘ideal state’ i.e. a state where the governing motivations and constraints are shared by all of the agents of the maxim environment as a single container. This maximum possible environment is, in our case, the entire human global population. To help illuminate this concept it may be useful to compare the system to other systems that share similar properties. 

The ideal gas law is an equation that requires a certain set of constraints to be shared by all of the gas molecules (individual agents) in the system in order to measure the interaction between the moles and any change in energy. As a system, the ideal gas law requires a certain set of conditions, a certain state, to serve any mathematical purpose. The shared constraints in this equation are described as a container of gas molecules that is affected by the same ‘work’ factor (same motivator). This work factor is an increase in pressure caused by the uniform movement across the entire surface area of one of the sides of the container thus affecting the molecules in a uniform manner. If the container described included separate sub systems with ‘work’ factors (motivators) that differ from one another then the system would not be in a sufficiently optimum state for the calculations of the equation. Purely from a mathematical and systems point of view, it appears that social evolution is optimizing towards a similar state in which all of the moles (agents) of the largest possible container (single global social architecture) share the same motivators and constraints. In this state the system would have optimized. The conditions within a system that has optimized are different from the conditions of that same system through the process of optimization. In a way, the internet represents the beginning of the completion of this proposed optimization of the system of social evolution. 

Based on observation of known data i.e. the great advancements of social evolution of known history, it appears that the following are laws of social evolution:  

Long lasting mutations in social evolution are dependent on:
1. Some degree of increase in the percentage of motivations and constraints shared by individual agents. 
2. Some degree of increase in the number of agents sharing the same motivations and constraints. 
3. The integration of previously separate social architectures into a new amalgamation thereof. 

Also, the following appears to be self-evident:
* Any increase in the percentage of motivations and constraints shared by individual agents and / or increase in the number of agents sharing the same motivations and constraints is dependent on some degree of increase in the accessibility of agents (physical contact or communication with one another). 

Also, based on the trajectory of social evolution as a system governed by the above laws, the following statement follows. 
* The ideal (and inevitable) state of social evolution as an optimizing system is a single global architecture in which agents share a certain percentage of the same motivators and constraints. 


##The role of the creative agent in the new social architecture. 
The internet is so many things. On one hand it’s the beginning of the completion of the optimization of the system of social evolution. But it is also the left hemisphere of our brain. When combined with exponential technology, the internet is increasingly serving the function of what half of our biological brains evolved to do. It’s no secret that anyone who carries a smart phone carries the entire wealth of accumulated human knowledge in their pocket. The trend of technological progress points to this pocket brain becoming increasingly wearable and eventually even integrated into a type of trans-human. What does this mean? Perhaps it means that we no longer need to concern our brains with the retention of information, perhaps it raises questions about the culture of specialization in the work force and certain aspects of the education system. Perhaps there’s little or no need to memorize recipes, or timetables or history dates anymore. As artificial intelligence and robotics improve at an exponential rate this phenomena will only be more amplified. Many of the activities that currently consume much of our time will be performable by robotics and artificial intelligence within a decade and many occupations will be rendered obsolete. Just as the agriculture revolution emancipated humans from the need to hunt and gather, perhaps the current information technology revolution promises to emancipate humans from the need to spend any of their time on distracting activities. Perhaps this revolution spells the end of the era in which humans behave according to scarcity of time and resources, an entirely new social architecture in which human beings become increasingly emancipated, empowered and enabled to explore the inherently creative nature of the human condition. As we move into a society of abundance, not just material abundance but labor abundance where machines are able to do more and more of the activities that previously kept humans distracted, humans will become increasingly empowered to explore imagination and creativity.  

We are already transitioning into this new social architecture and now more than ever, being a creatively disposed individual is an asset and not a liability. Not only is it an asset, it’s a commodity. The NYSE and IMB released a survey of more than 1,500 CEO’s from over 60 countries and 33 industries worldwide which found that more than 60% of CEO’s believe more than rigor, management discipline, integrity or even vision, successfully navigating this increasingly complex and disruptive world will require creativity. Creativity will become exponentially more valuable as machines become exponentially more efficient at all of the neuro-vertical activities based on repeatable systems such as calculations, data analysis and even learning. The human quality that is most difficult (perhaps impossible) to synthesize in coding and programming is creativity. A computer can learn to paint a Rembrandt or compose a piece of music that is as pleasing as a Mozart melody but is that being creative or simply repeating and imitating? It’s possible to argue that humans remain the only system capable of generating truly unique and creative ideas and solutions that previously didn’t exist. I would propose that creativity is the entropy of the system of information processing, essentially an accident with no direct intentional cause that is near impossible to replicate in synthetic coding, creativity is anomaly. 

The 21st century and the digital economy truly are the age of the creative. It’s time for the creative class to see themselves as more than fringe dwellers. Time to emerge from the shadows of the lane way, from painting in the lofty studio, from the countless hours practicing music alone, from the writing retreat. It’s time to engage in a new social architecture that needs you more than ever before. It’s also time for society to recognize the asset that is the creative class and empower and enable them in impactful roles in the transitioning social architecture.  

Most importantly, the human race needs to harness imagination and creativity while rethinking it’s future. The internet and exponential technology are presenting a blank canvas, a mirage of hope in what seems like a spiritually deserted age of humanities inevitable self destruction. As Noam Chomsky says “we move at an ever increasing pace, like lemmings following our leaders over a cliff” but there has appeared in the distance a glimmer of hope, a disruptive easel on the horizon commanding our attention. This blank canvas is encrypted coding designed by the universe to give itself an opportunity to continue learning about and understand itself. If the human race self-destructs, 4.6 Billion painstaking years of the incubation, birth and nurturing of intelligence on this habitable planet will crash and need a reboot. 

The titan and powerhouse of transformational change have torn open a wormhole to a parallel reality with a completely different kind of future that is bound only by the limits of our imagination. It is up to us, the normal people to imagine and create this new society and liberate the powerful from the shackles of greed. 

The emergent global network society needs the creative class to rise up and imagineer a future with a complete disregard for the known mistakes of history. While humanity should always learn from history, we no longer need to place limitations on our imagination while building the future we want. The conditions that caused the abhorrent behavior of all of known human history were fundamentally different to what we are now experiencing and will become exponentially differentiated over time. The human condition isn’t the human condition at all. The human condition is the conditions of the state of the optimization of the system of social evolution.  


