# Culture And Learning

It is becoming more and more relevant in the present day the notion that knowledge is the best tool in every situation. We’ve always seen how those who come better suited in terms of information will have a great advantage over those who have not prepared as well. At the same time, knowledge is the best medium for empathy, to wear somebody else’s shoes and see the world through other’s point of view, overlooking everything from this vantage point of fresh, new perspectives. This is probably the most dynamic of all the pillars we will talk about: knowledge comes in different forms depending on how its been acquired and what role it plays in someone’s life. Throughout history it has always been considered one of the most prestigious perks that one could have, granting honor and respect by those around you. Nowadays that role hasn’t really diminished, although new realities make it more precious to have then tools or budgets. However we are confronting ourselves in the present day with an overflow of content, misleading many to believe that a source’s information is entirely accurate while it may be entirely fictitious. It has become extremely easy to spread notions over the new communications media, and those who understand the workings and tricks of the online’s crowds can congregate quite a following of people who could, for sheer laziness to avoid source checking or simple flocking, make an untrue snippet of information become viral and concretely infect the minds of many. Nonetheless, those who are a bit more attentive to these issues and seek knowledge that may be less appealing to the click-bait pages will find that the internet has become a true treasure trove of data, information mostly freely accessible and surrounding the widest of topics, both old and new. It is indeed a true information revolution we are finding ourselves into, something that makes the what we had within our reach just a few decades ago pale in comparison. It is so new in fact that a huge number of people on the planet still don’t utilize it, haven’t been approached to it or don’t even have the means to. To say that this futuristic empowerment has universally happened would be untrue, but we all agree that the relevance of information technology on the world has been tremendously impactful. How did we come this far is such a seemingly short time? What was the significance of this information age on the way we live and how will it impact the future of human society?

We must consider that, through historical evidence, the information revolutions did not come from knowledge itself, but from the medium through which it was delivered. It wasn’t until humans started to write things down that the millennial tradition of spoken notions went out of fashion: while at the core of local life chatter and oral transmission of information was still widely used, the preferred method to hand down huge volumes of informations was to write them down, first in stone slabs, then vellum and papyrus and the last iteration was on highly repeatable, versatile paper sheets bound in books. As time progressed we’ve become very good at inventing easier ways to solve our problems and one of these was to get an easy, cheap, reliable and producing methods to crystalize and spread information as widely as possible. Lowering the bar to these processes was one step forward, taking away the prestigious, exclusive right of scribes and amanuensis, from the ancient Egyptians and the European medieval monasteries, meant that a wider range of people could be employed in the spreading of informations, and thus blossoming an economy surrounding the various steps of its propagation. The printing press, invented by Johannes Gutenberg in the late 14th century, revolutionized that previous concept, allowing an exponentially larger number of people to get their hands on books that previously were a luxury to posses. In fact, in that period, having a personal library was considered extremely prestigious and only a handful of people could afford it. The hard manual labour that was required to painstakingly write a whole book and bind it was per se a great endeavor, but the technological revolution that ensued from the printing press surely allowed the great blossoming periods of the Renaissance and the Illuminism to really shine and, most importantly, do so in the eyes of the largest group possible. It wasn’t until the late 18th, early 19th century that the next, hugely important step took place, when the Lumière brothers invented what will be a revolutionary tool in the spreading of knowledge. That tool was the Cinématographe, an early instrument capable of capturing moving images for them to be seen at a later time. Along side the telegraph, which constituted a communication revolution in its own right, this allowed for an unprecedented level of interaction with the spectators. The staggering achievement left many in awe or scared even, as trains seemingly ran towards them and black and white figures rapidly moved onto a flat screen. They could actually see, for the first time, places thousands of kilometers away without leaving their seats: witness important events, know distant cultures, learn hands-on practices with a teacher that’s always there to repeat the lesson thousands of times, to thousands of different students all over. It was the start of a new kind of phenomenon in its own right: a new level of remote knowledge sharing started to manifest, bringing about a host of novel ideas to do just that. Soon they started to realize the potential of moving images in storytelling, allowing for the performances of actors to be immortalized and propagate in theaters throughout the world. However these methods also served as a mean to spread knowledge through documentaries and notion snippets, to be shown in classrooms of all ages or diffuse details on new research to experts alike. It didn’t take long for this technology to take hold: in fact it took a very short time in comparison to the adoption rate of the printing press, thanks to a much more connected world then that of the medieval period. Soon, cinemas were the glamour which contributed greatly to the fashion and style of period after period, the government utilized motion pictures to spread propaganda, initially surrounding the Great Wars and then political statements (like the omnipresent red threat). Commercially viable television sets began to sprout here and there, making the spectacle of on screen entertainment affordable to every household. More and more programs were developed for the growing audiences of families, with different categories to suit different tastes and interests. Eventually new technologies like color TVs rendered it all the more enticing to get a hold of these new media machines, becoming the norm in hardware stores and a gathering point in bars all over. People would laugh at evening’s sitcoms, learn and be awestruck by documentaries and follow much more closely local and international events. Many would have to argue but it seemed that this new force made us even more attentive to each other and the world around us and. Sitting on the couch didn’t do any good to the garden in the backyard and many other activities surely suffered from the popularity of these new means to invest your time, but it made us care and be interested in new things with a wider spectrum then ever before. There was just so much that people could see and listed to on their televisions, but what was about to come really invoked a whole other meaning to digitally enhanced learning.
Starting in the early 1960’s, the electronics field was flourishing, and US research groups at work on the first packet switching devices created what was called the ARPANET. Very simple digital messaging from one computer to another, requiring prototypal dedicated hardware; It was only after 20 years, in 1982, that the TCP/IP protocol was standardized and the world started to get a grasp of what will become the internet. The first commercial Internet Service Providers (ISPs) began sprouting in the late 80’s and started a full commercialization in the US after 1995, when the NSFNET (National Science Foundation Network) was decommissioned, leaving an extremely fertile field free of limitations and restrictions. It soon started to spread to Europe, Australia and later to Asia. There is nothing that has touched our ways of living so profoundly, so pervasively. The internet is a set of technologies which allowed us to disrupt every single component of our complex society. We can now send instantaneous messages across the globe, video calls even, a world wide web comprised of forums of discussion where the participants can be the creators themselves, social networks interconnecting friends and families across the globe. Much like the silver screen revolution, this new digital ground was brimming with opportunities, many to be discovered entirely out of thin air, given the radically new concept on which it was based. We’ve been witnessing world-scale phenomenons happening before our eyes of which we still don’t comprehend the scope and where new global dynamics are redefining, on many levels, whats to be considered the norm. Multiplying the impact of television a hundred fold, the internet has empowered us with a communication infrastructure capable of radically reinventing anything from entertainment, news sharing, jobs’ priorities and pipelines and of course learning. What the TVs allowed us to see, the internet gave us the tools to interact with and build discussions around the subject to further our understanding about it. People suddenly had a window into a whole new world, one that was digitally manufactured from bits and packets to form anything that came to the mind of the programmer, a newly found god in the midst of a true information Rupture. That bar has been lowered and lowered in the subsequent years, with the basic technologies becoming more advanced as well as the interfaces becoming more user friendly, as a result of the humanization of this medium, all leading to an increase in new inputs and fresh contributions to the chorus. There is no real bottleneck nowadays to become, say, a forum moderator: all there is to know are the basic functions of a computer and we’ve had ample time to permeate that. We, as a species, have between our most fundamental necessities that of helping others, to further than cause of the larger group, to share and empathize  experiences and what this amazing new tool delivered was the unbounded power to do just that, in many, branching ways. Every minute, more than 300 hours of video contents are uploaded on Youtube, the biggest video online platform, the internet congregates nearly one billion websites and millions of photos are shared to and fro between a user group that comprehends nearly half of humanity and growing in number. This mountain of content is the result of people whose different interests enrich this intricate web of knowledge and entertainment and news and so much more, many still don’t know what to do with all of this outbursting information. But taking a step back and looking at the bigger picture will let us see how the internet is the natural meeting point of so many human social and cultural necessities, the ultimate sharing paradigm free of constrictions, both self imposed and physical.
The impact of the internet on our lives is deep and varied depending on the subject at hand. So much has been drastically touched by this invention and yet so much has yet to manifest in its full potential, thrusted forward by this force. The change has been so pervasive that many institutions work and are based on totally different principles then before, the society at large in which we live is ticking at the rhythm of an interconnected clock which regulates the various situations in different fashions, creating new and greater opportunities then ever before. How have our learning methods been impacted by this change? Are the education and learning systems of the world up to speed in providing the basic training required to cope with it? Has traditional education survived this information transition or have new, modern dynamics been born out of all this? The answers to these questions are from both sides of the coin, exposing a lack in the suitability of the traditional systems and, at the same time, revealing new ways to obtain better results. Among the flourishing contents of the world wide web there are a huge number of realities which have the purpose to teach to the users about a given number of subjects. They may be focalized on one topic or be very wide ranging but they all share some of the same attributes: they are mostly free to access and they transcend the old classroom thinking in many, if not all ways. Anyone can pick up a computer, or even an internet-connected smartphone or other gadgetry, and access all kinds of educational content, being freely shared and confronted with by a large number of people. It is in fact an attribute which breaks the limits of the old conception classrooms, allowing the students to be in the thousands range and thus creating a much more fervent and fertile conversation and environment. These websites are very well equipped and designed to encourage such forums to self sustain, creating an ever increasing database of discussions that will serve as both a testament and a data point for those in need of assistance with a particular issue. The forums will benefit from the contributions of those expert in the field as well as from those asking for assistance, adding to a chorus of people from both sides of the conversation. Of course there are also those sites that provide pure informations without a discussion forum to back them up; one example is Wikipedia, the largest archival aggregation of information of the internet. This is a phenomenon which has grown and developed through the advancements of computer technologies and, given that the real activity throughout the internet has only started in the last 30 years, the average age of the user groups is rather young, with a constantly increasing portion of these being teen students. The majority of these users was born into it and has grown with this technology and has always been in contact with this abundance of information: at the reach of a simple Google search was every tutorial or forum thread or article they could ever need. How does one so accustomed to this way of attaining information regard an “education” system which uses serialized, approved books, school semesters still planned surrounding the harvesting periods of 19th century farming families and tightly fits everyone’s skill and abilities in standardized, boxed tests? It is a shame to see how the radically changed methodologies of information gathering and retention that we see in younger generations all over the net aren’t being taken as an example from nowadays learning institutions to pick up the pace and systematically reimagine the way it could all be integrated in everyday’s society. A great deal of individuals simply don’t find in their schools the appropriate environment to support this new learning paradigm, lacking the required infrastructure and mentality to make it happen or outright blocking these kind of activities, effectively stripping away the best tool students could ever ask for. This only serves to encourage behaviors which are condemned as wrong, where as in their later adult and work life those tricks and skills would be an integral part of their day to day life. The hypocrisy of this system, which encourages active knowledge pursuit but cuts at the roots many modern attempts to attain just that is being addressed in a different fashion however, where the users fill the cracks in the cobblestone with their own proactive approach in their daily education challenges. Every modern student knows his or her way to the most effective educational website to address one issue or another or one of the several forums where the problem solving can get a more direct and personal take. This kind of mentality is like nothing there’s ever been in the learning field: now knowledge is not anymore secluded to single copy, unique books or passed on during isolated oral classes but is being shared, freely, unlimitedly and accessible by anyone all over the world. Students talk to each other as well as with other peers abroad constantly, they share notions, informations and absorb whatever knowledge is needed, often the moment right after the necessity comes up. They are already bypassing the present educational system with a better, more efficient and up-to-date alternative and they are also showing the world that this new methodology works much better at providing the right kind of assets for them to thrive in the modern society. Following this trend, many websites are aiming to weave together the new kind of knowledge infrastructure that is needed with these new realities to make the best of this innovation. Their purpose is to fuse the best of the forums’ discussion and exchange ecosystem with a persistent and reliable information archive which can be found in the form of text, images, videos, exercises and of other mediums. The way they are put is very humble and simple: they don’t pretend to provide the best course of action through which the informations need to be acquired. They give the users the ultimate liberty of choosing how to pursuit their hunger for knowledge, letting them explore every content they have archived, in whichever order and regarding any argument, being it simple math equations or nuclear physics. In some websites the users are also encouraged to produce their own “lessons”, in order to fill the cracks where their own archives may be lacking and to enrich the archive with different teaching methodologies, which can then suit different learning styles. While they may already employ the help of renowned experts to boost the quality and reliability of the platform, this effort allows the formation of a mesh of numerous experts on many fields that will surely help build up the content base of the website. Of course, when one of the last barriers to learning is language, the existence of online translation platforms make it all easier, both on the part of the site moderator who may employ the help of the crowd to quickly translate online content in numerous languages and for those who want to be able to draw from their archives.
This new take on education is starting to really put a new light on the old learning systems and how inadequate they are in the future networked society, with an overarching closed mentality and elitist organization. Optimistically enough, some institutions are noticing the shift in paradigm and are trying to become part of this new system with some targeted changes and additions to their educational arsenal. While some are merely providing classrooms with more recent tools like digital blackboards and smart projectors, or even more powerful computers, these are pitiful attempts to boast an upgraded facility and a fake keen eye on present needs. However there are a couple of instances where there is a genuine attempt to revolutionize the present scholastic experience, something that is already presenting some staggering results. A few years ago a joint initiative between Peter Norvig (Director of Research at Google) and Sebastian Thrun (robotics educator and founder of Google X) saw the launch of Udacity, a massive online open course (MOOC) which assembled the lesson’s contents of real, live Stanford lessons on artificial intelligence. There was a physical classroom of course, which included a hundred or so students who had the resources and so the privilege to personally attend the lessons, and at the same time online lessons were devised to learn the very same principles taught there, with a slightly changed format to accomodate for the online platform and thus the prospected students who attended remotely. The success of the course is proven by the active participation of over a hundred thousand remote students, attending the Stanford level lessons and competing with the elite, physical students on the same level. Thanks to this course’s unique approach, a great number of students from distant, even poor countries had the opportunity to obtain a snippet of education which they could have never hoped to get within their realm of possibilities. Even more interesting was to find out that, among the best students of the bunch, only a couple came from the actual student group from the Stanford classroom, while the great majority were as sparse and varied as the rest of the online following. This is to prove that there is a treasure trove of minds out there, in the underpowered regions of the world, that all they need is a chance to prove themselves to be the next Einstein or Newton, burrowed deep into the geographical misfortune they find themselves in. The course ended granting those who completed it a certification of accomplishment which may prove useful to stand out in the crowd, more so if you come from a poor education environment. Now Udacity has grown into a full fledged open courseware site, providing online courses to tens of thousands in various fields from mobile platform programming to UX design. This kind of endeavor represents an immense opportunity to the multitude of people who would otherwise lack a higher education entirely, or one that would be focused on the jobs of the present/future, as well as for those institutions who wish to reach out to the vast well of potential minds that are now connected to the world and each other. This kind of approach is what is required by the present educational systems, to embrace these new technologies, which allow for a greater level of interactivity between teacher and student, manifesting at the same time the need for a change in how we propose learning and education ourselves. Our societies are been weaved as we speak as an intricate web of interrelationships, which are developing new paradigms for how we work, produce, legislate and relate to each other and all of this is requiring a fundamental rethinking of the learning methodologies we use in our day to day lives. Such new dynamics are already presenting themselves as the natural evolution of how we learn, with the new mediums allowing for instantaneous access to information. As it’s logical, we are adopting the best way to do things and dumping the old, obsolete ones of the past, thanks to an always improved version of the tools we first found in our hands.
Of course we can assume that an education system, which in some cases has thrived for centuries, so well connected to the powers at play and in some cases influential for its fame and history, isn’t so inclined to change its organization and methods on the whim of a “temporary wind of technological prowess”. Some believe this to be a trend of irrelevant impact, that the kind of education one can get with traditional institutions is the superior choice when it comes to get a job and start adult life on the right track. However, against this rule of thought, we see everyday that the perspective on ones knowledge and what one can do is shifting from a “what degree you posses” to a “what have you accomplished with it thus far”. As access to information becomes widespread and very specific knowledge can be learned by anyone, anywhere, someone’s competence is measured by their proactive approach, their will to compete with peers on a field that’s been leveled by technology. Nowadays, employers are more intrigued by what you have accomplished through your dedication then what hangs framed behind your desk, and these accomplishments are obtained through putting yourself where stuff happens and making it happen. A higher education is not anymore required when it’s meaning remains getting a piece of paper and little practical knowledge, while it should be the enrichment of oneself through the dedication required to stand out between the rest of the crowd. Because as of now, that’s all it takes: someone’s will to stand out and a connection to the internet. Many could argue that talking like this is effectively putting lightly an issue with too many parameters at play which contribute to the bigger picture and indeed there are obstacles, imposed or not, that may differ from one person to another: race, their nation state’s inclination to support these needs, other needs which may take a priority, … Nonetheless we are experiencing, piece by piece, the demolition of these obstacles and the democratization of someone’s right to learn and to intellectually grow, by means of state’s education or self empowerment. It isn’t going to be easy nor fast but the requirements to be considered en par among the rest of the crowd are becoming the same for anybody, of any race or geographical dislocation.
Forwarding in time, foreseeing the global Network Society that will be weaved together by the interconnecting technologies, which will allow for an almost total sharing of needs and services like energy, resources and data, what will be the role of knowledge? How will one’s expertise in one field or another impact his or her role and importance after this socio-economic revolution? As wealth will change of meaning and the paradigm that will rule the relevance of one’s possessions will shift, knowledge will become the most important asset to obtain. Those who know a lot about a certain field and share their knowledge with the society will raise their social standing and importance, and the good thing is that it’s not going to be relegated to only the experts. As the fabrics of the forums get interlaces by the thousands of voices who add their opinions to the crowd, enriching the conversation and ascending the medium to a whole new level of relevance in its context, the future societies will benefit from the contributions of anyone with every bit they can give. The collective experiences will create a global archive that will manufacture the bonds of the future, bonds that will show the world to be one organism with common goals and perspectives. Culture and knowledge will glue the future society together and enrich our lives with the interconnected experiences of the multitude.
