# Food

Among the most important pillars of change, we put food production among the areas of human activities that will be radically disrupted in the coming years. The organization of our societies has always been dependent on the gathering of resources for the sustenance of the community. Food gathering has always been the top priority and is a practice which has seen its share of evolution in the course of history. We went from a hunter and gathering society to one that has radically reconfigured itself after the discovery of farming and cultivation. With it, we drastically reinvented the social structure of our groups, not having to rely anymore on the luck and skill involved in the foraging process but starting a ciclic rhythm based on the monthly rotation of the most important and fruitful crops. A new mindset seeped in and with it the realization that we could influence and control the world around us, carefully planning our resources to get a more reliable, plentiful income of food. We’ve devoted a great deal of our time to devise more efficient ways to work the farmlands, exploiting progressively more powerful sources of energy starting from our own strengths, to cattle, to the wind and water, then steam and diesel. The increasing energy that we could input into the system really helped relieve the effort to cultivate the land, while the only way to effectively increase the food production output was to increase the sheer surface area of the farm. That was up until we understood the basics of gene manipulation, allowing us to modify a wide selection of genetic information to produce bigger crops or grow tougher strains of different plants which could be cultivated more extensively. As groundbreaking as this breakthrough may have been, it has proved to be insufficient to keep up the production pace with an ever increasing population, and the only viable option to make it to where we are now was to increase the surface of land dedicated to farming and applying the most invasive of gene modifications. The subsequently more advanced methods of food production led to a host of different social phenomenons that have been integrated in the common riff raff of the present nation states, after being refined, century after century, by the present culture and mentality. During the european feudalism period all the farmland you owned was property of the feudatory, who demanded payment of a tithe, a tenth of whatever your farm produced to be given directly to the regent as tax payment or to the church as religious contribution. The control of food income and exchange is at the heart of a functioning and flourishing society, giving those states who had a firm hand on the most important trade routes an incredible advantage and leverage on international relationships. The colonialism era saw the rise of tensions as the control of resources such as luxury goods became of the utmost importance for the economical superiority of nations, in a global situation in which showing off to be the richest and most powerful was as important having the biggest armament. The current situation of peace and international accord has permitted us to develop new methods for extensive farming, thanks to a new level of automation, often allowing whole parchments of land to be cultivated from autonomous robots, and the simple fact that no more land could be colonized, thus needing to work on optimizing what we already have. This process, while still ongoing and working on its efficiency, is nonetheless in need of reconsideration if we are to look at the long term future of our species and all other that live with us.



It is without a doubt one of the most impactful forces that we applied to this planet, which shaped the landscape to better suit our needs, more often then not careless of the habitat and environment it touched. In this field like any other there have been advances which allowed it to take on a progressively increasing production rhythm, one that came abreast at the expense of the land’s surface area that have to be exploited for this purpose. We’ve filled up half of this planet’s emerged lands with plantations and farming terrain, gradually eroding away at the foundations of mountains and hillsides, favoring a gradual desertification and drying up the aquifers that sustain the reckless farming we’ve kept up to this point. The immense list of plant’s species that are apt for cultivation is nourishing a system which is geographically planning its territory to provide the soil needed to satisfy a crescent demand of products.  Furthermore the breeding and upbringing of animals for slaughter is an even more damaging practice then most would think. The population of “food animals” in the world is projected to be over 20 billion, far surpassing the 7 billion of humans and both numbers are increasing. The quantity of resources that need to be employed to generate the steak that will find its way to your plate is multiple times that of plants and vegetables: the much larger footprint of countless animals is astounding, with an approximate feed conversion ratio of 5:1 and 6800 liters of water on average to produce only 0,5 kg of meat. This statistics may prove to be a shocker but the reality of the facts surpasses these awful perspective. These animals also produce a huge amount of greenhouse gasses, something along the lines of 7.1 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2-eq) per year, or 14.5 percent of all human-caused greenhouse gasses releases. It is indeed the case to reconsider the way we produce our food, taking into consideration the entire supply chain which we’ve developed through millennia of presence and exploitation of the resources available. It is indeed again in technology where we need to look for the solutions to the various problems which are plaguing both us and the world around us. We’ve come so far thanks to our ingenuity, pushing the limits of our capabilities against the various challenges which we saw as the most relevant at the time of invention, being it a greater production for a growing economy and population or simply a way to uplift our society to its next phase of tribal evolution: now it is the time to steer our technological and social evolution towards a more conscious goal. We have the possibility to shape our future in a variety of directions, now broader then ever, and in the face of challenges and global issues so pressing and decisively grave we must take into our own hands this incredible power and create the stability that this world desperately needs.
These are not problems that we have only just recently discovered thankfully and, as we notice day by day, technology is a world where each and everyone of its fields interacts synergistically with each other so, both intentionally and not, we are making interesting progress towards dealing with all this. As the ways we can approach it are many and differentiated from each other in terms of scale and methodology employed, some seek to reinvent the way we structure our farming and redirect our food managing more intelligently, while others are delving deep into frontier’s science to deliver an entirely new way to create food. It’s not always the case that new technologies have to be discovered to be able to tackle the present issues, but a change in mindset and organization could be all there is to implement to save us a lot or trouble, and though it may seem misleadingly simple, one of these is extremely promising. This newly bred concept comes from the idea that closed environments like underground greenhouses (sometimes associated with illegal cultivations of certain plants) could be the medium for this revolution, which puts them in a new light of shared food production and managing. These greenhouses are becoming ever more controlled and automated, with the technological means to help deal with the trivial tasks of cultivation, becoming more and more accessible both in terms of availability and usability by the vast majority of people. This also means that within these systems it is possible to bend the slightest functions to the different needs of the users. The UV lamps can be tweaked to deliver the right amount of irradiation for a certain kind of plant, the soil can be micro influenced in chemistry composition to provide the perfect growing environment, the air itself can be controlled as well as a great number of other factors which put all kinds of information in the hands of the hyper informed grower. These and many other variables are being embedded in complex systems that are providing the perfect toolkit to let anyone grow whatever they’d like in a closed, controlled environment. However the true disruption within this revolution is not to be found in its technological prowess per se, but in the technology enabled new way of thinking that is brought about by those who see the implications of what we are now capable of achieving. What these methods of food production are enabling, through hydroponics (cultivation through an artificial, water based soil) and all the rest of the kit, is to potentially shift the area exploitation paradigm from one that is surface based to one that is volume based, allowing us to freely construct vertically, skyscraper styled factories that could output the food supplies we need with no restriction of season or geographical location. There are many angles to analyze deeper and potential bottlenecks to confront but we have the technological basis to make this possibility a reality. Theoretically the UV lighting could be powered by photovoltaic panels on the roof of the building, the chemical ingredients could be picked and and produced only when needed and at a granularity which would cut back on waste, every aspect of the farming would be controlled as to make the production as efficient as can be. Where as in many nowadays’ skyscrapers we have a whole level dedicated to clothes washing and drying of the whole building, we can foresee a not too far future when another level, bigger then the first one, will be implemented in every building for the production of every food supply need that the residents might have, closing the circuit and effectively rendering the building a self contained unit. Those who are betting their time on this keystone research are already making huge progress on the level of modularity and flexibility that these environments will have to have to be adopted as widely as possible. The key of this process is to make it available and modifiable by everyone, creating a host of different versions of the greenhouse system that will let the user have the flexibility to choose the best one for each need, or manufacture different modules that will work to produce various crops in the best conditions possible. We already see some movement in the field, with projects like the MEG, an Italian open source indoor greenhouse project which lets the entire research and development ecosystem be accessible and modifiable by the crowd, allowing just the kind of branching out that this technology really needs.
It has a long way ahead of it to become the mainstream in building planning, so wired into the mindset of future societies that it will be as important as a good transportation infrastructure. In order to boost the process through which we will adopt it into our lives we must take into consideration the complementing technologies that will be implemented into this system, providing the building blocks for the future greenhouses to be considered feasible. As solar energy production technologies become cheaper and more efficient they will constitute a great option for the powering of the artificial lights, as the production of micro nutrients and chemicals becomes easily available and flexible it is going to provide the fuel through which the plants will thrive. The ubiquitous state of flowing information in which we are constantly finding ourselves in is the practical glue which will hold the different pieces together, connecting ourselves with an interface that will analyze and intelligently provide the data regarding all the minutiae that make up the greenhouse ecosystem. A smart planning and production pipeline is going to be required in order to provide for every need of the society and, very similarly to the situations in which we may find ourselves now, scarcities will be handled through distribution of lacking products coming from where there is abundance, and tweaks will be implemented to obviate certain problems in the future. The organic, hyperconnected society of tomorrow will understand these issues and, through various scenarios’ simulations, predict the dynamics that will arise in order to be better prepared to tackle them, sharing all its resources equally in this newfound prosperity.
Many people start raising eyebrows at this point, indisposed at the lacking mention of a principal meal component in their diets: what about meat? Will we find a way to confront these issues to disrupt the old, barbaric slaughtering of animals and render it all obsolete? Happily we can notice that the world is already turning its gaze on a few, interesting parties at work on solving this problem, coming out with proof of concepts straight out of science fiction. The research has been done and done again and thankfully we are getting the ropes on how stem cells actually work in all their wonderful, branching functionalities. Stem cells are a peculiar kind of unidentified cell which can become any other kind of specialized cell, under certain conditions. Hypothetically one could use stem cells to biologically manufacture anything in the physiology of the donor, being it human or otherwise. Several times, stem cells have been used to create entire organs from nearly scratch and even come up with new treatments to hard to treat pathologies. The uses of these wonderful cells seem endless, and some researchers have been prodding at a field which could utterly, entirely disrupt our conception of producing meat. A group of researchers of the Maastricht University in the Netherlands have tried to recreate a hamburger through in vitro culture of beef stem cells, bioengineered to make muscle fibers. They painstakingly took the single muscle fibers (20’000 more or less) and weaved them together to make up the strings of the actual hamburger. The whole project took months of research and a sum close to $325’000 to make only a couple of hamburgers and then went live on a tv appearance to have judges taste the novelty meal. Their verdict was mostly positive, saying that the hamburger was entirely identifiable with commonly available meat, if a bit tasteless and stringy. That was due to the fact that the hamburger was solely made up of muscle cells, lacking the fat and other soft tissues that would be present in nature (another piece of trivia is that the muscle strings were of a yellow tint when initially created, due to the lack of oxygen during formation, but that has been resolved with posthumous intervention). This was an astounding achievement: for the first time synthetic meat has been artificially grown in a controlled environment and proved up to the challenge of traditional meat. What we learned from this experiment will serve as an immense data cluster for the future refinements, such that will make it even harder to decide which candidate will be considered best, the traditional or the hamburger of tomorrow, and its not going to be a fair challenge for long. The level of control that we have in a lab will allow us to take action toward enhancing the positive traits of the meat and suppressing those that we want to avoid, concretely manufacturing a biologic recipe for a perfect taste, texture, consistency and so much more, parameters that will be unmatched by their older, random versions. However, many would argue that the price point for such a couple of hamburger, however deliciously engineered, would be appalling to propose to nearly everyone. Luckily, the people behind the endeavor had their hands full after the feat and achieved in yet another shockingly important step. The price for that same amount of meat has plummeted to the much more reasonable price of $11 per burger, with a price per kg of meat of around $80. Along with this they announced that the technique has been refined as to be able to obtain, just from a small sample of muscle tissue, something along the line of 10’000 kg of lab meat. This is a staggering breakthrough, more over taking it from the point of view of a future, large scale industrialization. They still have some hurdles in front of them: they need to invent a substitute medium for the stem cells which currently is fetal calf serum, they need to devise a way for this technique to be scaled up at industrial levels, and so on. All in all, Mark Post still doesn’t believe the technology could be released industrially before another 20 or 30 years, but we can already start seeing the huge impact that it will provoke on the future’s socio economical system.
We would have found a way to avoid nearly 15% of man made greenhouse gasses exhaustion, a way to save an exorbitant number of resources (fodder and water supplies, land surface) and put an end to the outright animal slaughter. We must of course still comprehend what this new production method will require to function properly in terms of resources, but we must admit that, compared to the old way of doing things, the advantages are unquestionable. This, like the ideas and mindsets behind the future greenhouses, is the next step in the advancement of our technology to supplant the obsolete ways of producing and providing for our needs. The modularity and adaptability of these methods mean that we can radically reinvent our societies, severing the ties from the polluting, careless ways of the past and become the global, conscious citizens that the world needs. Through them we will discover a newfound abundance of land, of resources of technological ground to thread in new, exciting directions, and it is going to be up to us to make the best of it all. It goes without saying that the old institutions will see their tendrils crumble to pieces unless they find a way to integrate themselves within the swift change, leaving behind their mentality of the past and allowing the future to manifest itself. Many other powers now at play in the food production business will have to reinvent their role in the game, seeing from a new, decentralized perspective how they could fit into the redesigned world of tomorrow. However, reiterating the centralized production, pyramidal hierarchy way of the past is to put shame on the potential of these new technologies. What they also allow is to be free of the constrains of traditional societal needs, such as a central, univocal food source from where anyone has to draw, prone to monopolization from a powerful few. Each one could have a food production plant of their own, similarly to how one could have a fridge or an oven. On a larger scale, the collaboration between the smaller units may bring forth a networked mesh of food production capabilities, creating a mentality of joint effort to provide for a sharing community but where the power to create the supplies is not centralized but distributed among its members. It is not so unthinkable to start imagining a world so radically changed by these new conception technologies. We have done it plenty of times in the past, revolution after revolution we saw our world dynamically shift from one practice to another, progressively advancing and putting in focus a larger and larger scope. Now we are on the right track to positively impact the world after we’ve blemished it for centuries, and we are going to change it, a meal after another.