# Manufacturing

*by Cosimo Orban*

## Disruptive since its beginning
The power to create is of the utmost importance in every society on Earth. There has always been a special social class comprised of those whose hands had to produce the tools for the survival of the whole community and whose knowledge was passed on generation after generation, gradually improving in craft as the research brought in new insights and the technology tore down old barriers. The craftsmen where the oil for the ever consuming wheel of society, and as time passed their role never diminished, only shifted in their focus. As new machines arose which were capable of actuating repetitive task very rapidly and extremely reliably, at first harnessing the powers of nature like wind and water and then exploiting steam and pressure during the industrial revolution, those who were once the main workforce of production became the supervisors of the much more powerful, much more efficient rising machine presence. The menace that many saw in this powerful change resulted in numerous uprisings, the luddites claiming that machine operated labour would result in lesser quality items produced by less skilled craftsmen who would sweep away the old artisan class. Against this rule of thought it has been observed that the majority of products that came gushing out of the production line of the machine laborers were of higher overall quality due to the reliability and precision of the robotic arm that put every bit and piece into place. Big industry players took advantage of this, enabling a faster product output and guaranteeing a higher grade final product, also dropping prices for those items that are easily produced in mass and to be sold in large scale. This has also been a key point of the booming industrial production of parts during the Great Wars, where the need for spare parts, new armaments, vehicles, general equipment and relief supplies meant for a relentless workflow in the big factories, now ranging far and wide in terms of production specialization. After the horrors of war, the world was ready to start over, and in the manufacturing realm this not only meant newly found peace to explore potential markets, but also new technologies to bring about drastic change to the way (and the things) we create. There are two main revolutions to mention for the disruptive change they meant for the industry: new materials to experiment with and computerized machinery. Research like the one Giulio Natta conducted, which won him the Nobel Price for chemistry, lead to new, exotic plastic material (marketed with the name Moplen), cheap to produce in quantities, easily molded to whichever need one may require and with mechanical and physical characteristics far different then anything previously manufactured. Whole new lines of products have been invented, old issues have been tackled and new, unthought of uses have been thought up thanks to these materials’ features. The advent of computerized manufacturing enabled the steam-powered, man directed machines to take a step further in terms of flexibility and creation capabilities. The invention of the computer and electronics, with its further research and advancements allowed us to take the design process from the pencil and paper to the digits and computer calculations. The inhuman reliability of machines and electronics thus changed the mind behind the robotic arms, even though for the most basic of functions, but nonetheless aiding their human counterpart in achieving since then impossible feats of precision and reliability. New techniques like laser engraving, cutting or CNC milling, requiring a finer hand and greater control then the inaccurate human hand-eye coordination were rendered possible and optimal thanks to the processing units that made the perfect calculations to make them happen. The trend inexorably continued, with computers gaining processing power, and becoming ever so useful in the design and production process of pretty much any product at any point of industrialization. The level of detail achievable by the these tools is always increasing, reaching nowadays the limits of the very atoms in current CPUs and electronics, and the level of expertise required to utilize such wondrous machines is getting lower and lower, enabling a wider group of people to benefit from them.

## Shifting the paradigm
We can look at the whole history of manufacturing, which we now cited very briefly for it stretches a long way back in time and way more deeply in complexity, as with each step further it takes the more available and accessible the technology to create and design an idea becomes. At first it took the hard labour out of the human tasks but still needed them to operate the machines from start to finish, then small levels of autonomy gradually allowed them to complete progressively more complex tasks, at which point the operator only needed to press a few buttons to make the magic happen and see the turbulent movements of machine aided manufacturing produce whichever item was ordered them. The implementation of a smarter, more complex processing unit and finer grade tools allowed the once called artisan to almost completely set back and relax as the file he digitally designed was brought to life by almost fully automated machinery, ready to do the bidding of the code that has passed through the many filters of a very simplified user interface. The skills of the craftsmen through time have gone from the rough work of hands and elbow grease to a very standardized and intuitive designing process that is practically the only step required by us to initiate the creation of a physical object, putting aside the frivolous start-button pressing that is now very well integrated in the conceptual phase. We start to notice how the advancements in manufacturing technologies have been democratizing all the required steps to take an idea from the conceptual stage to the finished product, lowering the bar of technical and craftiness expertise and allowing pretty much everybody to become a craftsman in his own right. The flexibility of todays technologies to work with a variety of materials and produce an ever increasing range of forms and shapes embraces a group of creative and curious tinkerers wider then ever before, allowing them to experiment in various fields. At the same time this democratization severs the ties that were a necessary burden with the over producing, standardized manufacturing industry, as the widespread capability to produce and to self sustain the supply of utensils and various items starts to manifest itself in a lot of different situations across all levels of production.  
The first sign of this disrupting revolution was seen in the early 1970’s, when the electronics and coding hobbyist niche was starting to develop and create its own alternatives to the big industry computers, experimenting, learning and doing in a sharing mindset. The famous kids in a garage, playing around with electronic boards, connecting this to that and figuring out better ways to do things and, eventually, building their very own prototype, an idea borne of ingenuity and curiosity. Who would have thought that they would have prospered into extremely profitable companies, practically changing the world, from the most humble and most fruitful of beginnings? The way they paved in front of them was enabled by the technology that was once elitist and expensive and then affordable and readily available to the great majority of people. More recently, new manufacturing technologies are taking the crown in the sharing, empowering way that electronics once represented, technologies like 3D printing. 3D printing encompasses a host of digital manufacturing technologies that produce a tridimensional, physical object from a CAD (Computer Aided Design) file. They are composed of different printing methods, depending on the material used different technologies may be employed, resulting in a range of qualities and final properties, and the most common in nowadays 3D printers is FDM (Fusion Deposition Modeling), the layer by layer deposition of melted material . The real revolution behind this new way of creating is the possibility of shaping forms and curves previously impossible to recreate, thus giving an almost unrestricted level of freedom to the designers who can now experiment with wilder and more abstract shapes, and also providing new grounds to develop functional structures to the objects. It’s been a few years now that 3D printing has taken the front page of most tech news sites and forums, almost daily, for its continuous outburst of novelties and initiatives. It seems that almost every tech company out there has a section dedicated to digital manufacturing and are eager to explore and analyze how this fertile new market can be exploited and merged with their current field. What is still not all that understood is how technologies like 3D printing are putting in the hands of consumers and professionals alike the creating power of milling CNC machines, high precision manufacturing plants, free of constraints and cheap to obtain. Everyone can now go out and buy a decent 3D printer that will be able to replicate pretty much any piece of item present in their house, with a variety of choices of materials, quality level and general functionality. Of course, being this a technology in its teen years, we still have some issues to tackle (slow printing times, more material flexibility, …) before we will start to see this futuristic promise come true, but the trend that we have observed in the recent years and the amount of fervent activity surrounding it all leads us to think that it will just be a matter of time before it’s going to be the most relevant household appliance or office tool of the bunch. The booming of 3D printing only happened some five years ago because of patents expiring and giving free leave to engineers all over the world to use these methods to produce their own products, and thus starting the accelerating avalanche of market competition, the race to a better printer than the neighbors’. Whichever 3D printer one may choose over the others (and there is ample choice, based on one’s needs), everyone who operates them, or even better, has the chance to materialize his own digital design into the real world and finally hold it in his hands can’t deny a jolt of joy and excitement creeping along his spine. This feeling wonder, that can be felt just the same when seeing the machine moving and operate, leads to a crescent excitement when this thought comes into ones mind: what if I were to 3D print everything I will ever need, the moment I need it? What if this machine straight out of science fiction could potentially render me independent from from the general item supply chain?

As hard to believe as it may be, this is a scenario worth considering. The path ahead may still need to be adjusted and perfected, as it should, but the analyzed direction holds true to the facts we are observing. As the technology progresses, fixing its deficiencies and jumping over bureaucratic obstacles, it is foreseeable that in most cases the lack of an item will be solved by creating the part yourself, modifying it to your need and customizing it to your liking. Such a customized and peculiar order would have been expensive and impractical to deliver to a large number of customers on behalf of the industrial manufacturers, who don’t have the production plasticity to adapt to great levels of personalization. Once materials like metals and ceramics, which require particular 3D printing technologies like laser sintering of powder particles, get down to the level of affordability and ease of use such that everyone will be able to benefit from them, a new paradigm of manufacture and sharing will have to be implemented, one that will transcend and render obsolete the old production line. The subsequent step ahead would be to make any object created in this manner out of recyclable materials, in order to close the circle with reusability and be able to work with a fixed quantity of material, avoid waste and potentially even make us more considerate and appreciative of what we have and how we use it. These technologies could enable the new creatives to manufacture ideas that could one day change the way we live, taking the sketch from prototyping to finished product in a very small number of iterations, overcoming the lead times of Chinese prototyping factories and granting the necessary rhythm to bring about the needed tweaks and modifications to the product. Citing William Gibson, “The future is already here, it’s just not very evenly distributed”, and though we are seeing staggering advancements in the field, there are still some bottlenecks that are preventing everyone to be a part of the change. These days the required expense to buy a metal sintering 3D printer for high performance, high detail objects is an option only for the wealthy professionals and businesses that wish to delve into the very best that digital manufacturing has to offer. Many of those who are waiting to try 3D metal printing for themselves are hoping to see the Kickstarter project that will answer their needs without lightening too much their wallets. Others are taking a more active approach to the problem. Many could argue that a 3D printer will never be the replacement to the various factory machinery that have, until now, reliably produced high grade parts from very performant materials, such that are the only suitable ones for industrial usage. Nonetheless the lack of machinery to manufacture designs on our own is filled by the numerous 3D printing services worldwide. The simple and immediate nature of how these services work is a great selling point for a lot of people to use their platform. The process is rather simple: anyone can order a 3D model (their own or from another designer), choose the material of their liking (resulting in a variety of physical attributes and aesthetic qualities, as well as different prices) and proceed to pay online and have the 3D printed object delivered to their doorstep. Many of these services are pushing toward R&D of new, exotic materials to present to their customers, primarily as a result of the spread of common materials in affordable 3D printers, which are becoming the norm in designing and hobbyist desktops all over. While these services have certainly gathered a lot of customers for their convenience, others have decided for a more proactive approach. A shared creation space comprising millions of dollars of industrial equipment and 3D printers is how those behind Techshop responded to the need to democratize their usage. For a monthly subscription anyone can be a part of a community of users which will be able to get their hands on extremely powerful and extremely costly pieces of equipment that would otherwise be out of their reach. Within their walls there are also a set of already experienced teachers who will gladly share their knowledge with others. In the same way, other realities are trying to help those interested into working actively, manufacturing their dreams, but with a more shared, more synergic approach. All over the world now there are places that will let you see for yourself and teach you how to use a particular utensil, operate a 3D printer, work with different materials while in a sharing environments where costly equipments are at the reach of whoever enters. Places like the FabLabs, a co-creation space first founded at MIT and now a set of principles on which to found new FabLabs anywhere independently, offer anyone to participate in a co-creation space full of manufacturing material and machinery, in a safe environment in which to learn and experiment freely. The FabLabs themselves are separate entities, with their own agenda and managers, but they often collaborate to organize unique events and gatherings, both internationally and locally, spreading the work of notable designers and promising creatives. The ecosystem thrives with a community of experts and learners alike who benefit from the teachings of those more experienced then themselves, and act with synergy with those whose knowledge is complementary to theirs and with whom new ideas may arise and bring fruits.
It is interesting to note how the manufacturing revolution is happening with an undoubted shift of requirements for those who would like to be actively engaged in creation. While once the elitist privilege of those whose education and wealth got them in a position where learning a craft and putting together a business to sustain themselves was a better option then being passive consumers, now everyone can have all the right tools to become a craftsman. With this assumption also comes a natural train of thought: a shift in mindset is happening as well. There was a time when having the best equipment was what gets you far, nowadays the real value rests in knowledge and experience. Easily available technology makes the knowledge on how to operate it and how to design towards producing something with it of great value, something that is going to stand out among the others. This kind of education encompasses a great variety of subjects that, intwining within each other, create the kind of expertise that is going to be able to work with all the processes of digital manufacturing. Abilities like computer programming, 3D modeling, digital simulation and designing, technical knowledge on the machines and how to use them, electronics, all creating a winning synergy, one that needs a good balance of those perks based of which inclination one may have toward one field or the other. In order to be able to fit into this particular scenario, to obtain this set of knowledge the traditional school system is not anymore suitable to deliver for a citizen of the society of the future. With its time schedule centered around harvesting periods, centuries old importance classification of subjects, dumb evaluation of knowledge and experience, one cannot hope to be ready for the future in time. What has been widely spread as a motivational message and as an alternative to this obsolete system is by far the best way to approach the problem. In some way getting back to the time when a resourceful and determined apprentice dedicated himself to study a craft under a master craftsman, one can surround himself of countless craftsman, whose level of experience may be higher then his, and learn all he can from the inputs of this environment. As you learn by doing what interests you, the secondary effect of learning little bits of information of the complementary subjects required to reach a predetermined goal serve as memetic background to sustain yourself through potentially countless other endeavors. In the present, constantly interconnected world it has become a viable solution that of becoming a so called “self taught” expert, a definition which doesn’t really hold true to what it entails. The internet has rendered it so easy to get access to so much information that anyone could, given dedication, learn almost anything there is to learn but the real value in the interconnectedness resides elsewhere. The internet is a medium to numerous, vibrating communities, always ready to help a fellow learner solve a particular issue, hands on, or figure out a better way to do things thanks to their particular insights. The chatter moves fluidly where interested people may bring their own helpful voice to the crowd and opportunities may arise to piece together something amazing, something that may ultimately be better then the sum of its parts.
In future world’s societies, this sharing of ideas, expertise and manufacturing capabilities is what is going drive everyday life of its individuals. In a networked fashion, the lack of certain skills or materials here may be complemented by one of many other instances elsewhere; fortunately, the lack of designs can be addressed in various fashions, all that have transcended how we used to do things in the past. We’ve gotten over the need of squirting ink onto a paper sheet to visualize a concept for later manufacturing, but now the same skills of idealizing an object at a conceptual stage have bypassed onto the screen of our computers into the three-dimensional realm. It is logical that the digital manufacturing revolution needs digital inputs for it to process information and create the finished product and luckily we’ve been developing our designing interfaces since the last twenty years. It is now fairly quick to get the bearings of how a 3D, interactive design interface works and it is something that anyone can start to practice with one of the several, free options available on the web (see Blender or SketchUp ). The basic 3D design skills, learned in the first 20 minutes of trying out the different functions of the software, grant you the required tools to model just about anything that comes to mind and a whole new host of possibilities opens up when you couple that with the chance to manufacture them all on your desktop. Many won’t have the time to delve into learning this new skill or for other reasons won’t have the chance to design the much needed part themselves, but not to worry. As of today, there are lots of sites on the internet that will let you search for a desired model and download it freely, already optimized for production with 3D printing even. Websites like Thingiverse and YouMagine make it extremely easy (almost addictive) to browse their huge lists of 3D models, designed by enthuisiasts and professionals alike, and obtain a particular model that may be of use to your needs. It is conceivable that 3D printing of parts and components will be optimal in regions where access to resources is hard or possibly expensive. That has been one of the reasons why NASA has recently put a 3D printer on the International Space Station, with the help of the Silicon Valley company Made in Space, to address for the need of astronauts to have a very specific tool for a very specific situation of distress, in a short time, on the spot, without the need for an expensive, wasteful supply cargo launch from down on Earth. The military is also considering putting 3D printers on the edge of the battlefield, where the dire need of spare parts could be solved through a trivial email from central command, delivering the design for the 3D printer to spit out what is needed. There is however an arising problem that will have to be addressed in order to make this methodology work properly: who can guarantee that this particular 3D model, which has passed through countless other computers, emailed here and there, possibly even modified, still retains the precise measurements and level of quality with which it was designed? Just like an image found on the web, after being swept all over the internet sees its final quality helplessly degraded, a digital design file may be corrupted or result unreliable when the final use for the 3D printed part is to fit in a specific situation. A solution to this may be to manually check if the design is properly up to specification, a tedious process, but If we are going to rely serenely on these manufacturing technologies we need certified regulations that will let us be sure that the model we are getting will be as specified. Realities like Authentise aim to be a solution to this problem, creating a digital certificate that will be used as an undoubted proof of the trustworthiness of a 3D model. There is still much to unravel about how we relate to this new way to create and I’m sure this is just one of the issues we will find along the way and we already start to see the players who will try their luck in finding a potential solution. Each of these situations is a testament to how the interconnection that the internet has provided serves as a new paradigm in sharing and general problem solving. Once the most important issues slowing the spread of digital manufacturing will be addressed, how will we fit in a networked society that can produce almost anything, anywhere, when it is needed? How will the total availability of every manufactured product affect how our society will behave and be organized? What will be the roles that will prove to be useful?
Another interesting thought to consider, probably the greatest impact that digital manufacturing will have in the close future, is how it is inevitably going to affect the traditional economics and the market surrounding the manufacturing of goods. It is true that the old and present ways of commerce have done a pretty decent job getting us this far, allowing us to build up empires and social structures that, depending on the time periods, may have turned out good or bad. But it is certain that nowadays economic structure won’t be able to manage the manufacturing output of the future, something that is going to be radically different in nature to what it was conceived for. It is an interesting and difficult mind experiment, to think of how such a vision for the future could be meshed together with an economy fit and advanced enough to organize the transactions between its members, even considering the fact that, rewinding back at what we observed before, such an overlying system may be superfluous. What if, in this almost utopian analysis of the future, there was no need of an economy? The moment everyone has the possibility of recreating, Star Trek style everything from an overarching, constantly interconnected community who is bucket full of designs to get you through your day, who’s to say that you should spend your hard earned money to buy a traditionally manufactured item from a store? It is possible to visualize a society in which the right to manufacture is as important as drinking, eating and living itself, and providing for oneself and those close to you in a world where technology as rendered it possible to put creation everyone’s hands is the basis for a serene way of life.
Things are moving faster then we can track with all that is happening around us. Even though 3D printing may seem like a passing trend of an extravagant plaything, it is showing itself in all it disruptive presence in the industry, supplanting entire processing plants to obtain parts with the same technical specifications. While this turbulent world we are in seems to be sweeping away, changing beneath our feet so fast we feel like we are going to faceplant the floor, I can optimistically confirm that it has never been easier to approach the world of manufacturing. While the exotic technologies surrounding 3D printing may sound intimidating it is now really easy to approach a co-creation space, get to know what this is all about and actually be ready to work with these machines in no time, both in terms of hardware and the design software behind it. Trying to figure out what to do with this technology is good, but the real step toward embracing it fully is to understand what are going to be the future, global dynamics that will arise from this revolution in the making. The craftsman of the future will base their value on their knowledge and creativity, borne of synergic experiences that shaped a creative vision that transcends the old areas of expertise and allows them to take full advantage of the digital manufacturing opportunity that is manifesting. The present economic and political interests will initially collide against this inevitable change, but eventually they will morph themselves into the future adaptations of the societal needs that will complement our daily lives. 