# Preface

We live in incredible times. We are witnessing almost on a day by day basis technological advancements that are repeatedly surpassing what we previously thought was the threshold of our astonishment. We can safely say that every aspect of our lives is being impacted, in one way or another, by yet another synergic application that we devised through technology’s wide ranging reaches. Today is the time when we are starting to conceive possible solutions to insolvable problems, the likes that were once thought to be unshakeable facts of life like mortality, all made possible thanks to each and every step ahead we’ve made in the sciences and technologies. From this advantageous point in time we can analyze how new tools and energy sources have, throughout history, always granted us, the toolmakers, the means to progress greatly toward our objectives, in a fashion that can only be described as exponential. As thus, following the ever pressing push of technological change, we have developed our societal model in a pyramidal structure that centers the organization of the whole organism around its tip, the powerful few who hold in their hand the fate of the 99% of our world. There is something however that is threatening the present socio-economical system with a total paradigm shift in the way we organize our way of living. In the last two hundred years a set of technologies has manifested itself, in different times and magnitude and some even appearing only recently, in all its disruptive force to the world, putting the hierarchical and top-down organization of the Nation States in a new light. The nature of these technologies is changing toward a decentralized, distributed model that is more akin to a network rather then the traditional, centralized governing structures in which we are trying to fit them into. As time passes, it is becoming more and more obvious that the way we have always relied on to make our societies work properly, as best we can, is not going to be sufficiently advanced for the coming Network Society. These revolutionary approaches to our way of producing energy, food, everyday objects and even manage our law making process and money/services transactions are manifesting the need to a deep reinvention of what societies are in a context that is more interconnected then ever before. This coming revolution will require a shift that will not be as smooth as we may hope: this new paradigm will put a lot of pressure upon the existent organizations, which will fight to keep their privileged position and grasp around our societies’ functions, and those entities that will not have the forethought to evolve into their future iterations will be entirely wiped out.
This model of the future is based on facts and realities that have been observed throughout history, a trend that has continued unperturbed and has reached in recent years a magnitude that cannot be ignored any longer. Similarly, and mostly due to, Moore’s Law, this too is a puzzle that is starting to take shape before our eyes in an almost predictable fashion. The path that these exponential technologies are carving in front of them is something that is entirely analyzable and although clues of its ongoing disruption are already being collected and discussed, there is still a need to organize the conversation, focus it on the fields that are being affected and arm it with the analytical tools that will allow us all to test and explore the future that is ahead of us. The future world will be filled with opportunities that will be there to be grasped, in future business areas that we may even not know about or have thought of approaching yet, that is why a thorough understanding of the subjects in play is key to be able to ride this unstoppable wave of change, unscathed and, on the contrary, positively changed. Raising the global conscience surrounding these topics we at Network Society Research aim to provide the spark that will ignite the debate on our fate in the coming technological disruption and ,most importantly, how our societies will have to adapt to it, in order to fully benefit from the shift. We will all have to play our roles in this new networked society, and they may be different then today’s, but the points in its favor should greatly outshine our fear of change.
