# The Technological Basis Of Social Evolution

Since the dawn of time one of the greatest discussions to provoke silent, thoughtful retreats or fervent, passionate discussions has been one of the closest to our very being. What makes us human? What is that peculiar physiological asset that, if stripped away, would make us in all respects equal to our fellow animals? Certainly the answers given to this questions are many and colorful and we still don’t quite know the right one, but we know something for certain. We know that thanks to our curiosity and our inquisitive mind we have managed to get ourselves down from the african trees without getting eaten, we advanced our understanding of harvest and gathering, formed tribal societies and, with time, colonized every corner of Earth. Thanks to our technology. It has been our technology that has allowed us to brave the tall grass of the planes, pointy stick in hand and rudimentary bark shoes to keep us fast on our feet. The light of our fires scared night predators whilst keeping us warm through the countless winters that we endured through ice ages and foreign lands. Tools like scythes and shovels allowed us to harvest the fruits of our farming experimentations, allowing us to leave hunting and gathering for the reliable, flexible and controllable harvest cycles. Through technology we built our cities and societies, each new technology marking a shift in how we worked and how our very societies ticked. We have always relied on it to make our lives better and, now more then ever, we are bound to it for sustenance, energy, security and for the fundamental infrastructure of the organized machinery that is today’s world.  So we can see how our survival has always depended on our wits as well as our technology, defending us from the hostile world around us and giving us the means to solve problems and finding better solutions to life’s problems and challenges. We probably wouldn't have made it through one of the many glaciations were it not for it. It can very well be that, putting it from this angle, the only difference between ours and the dinosaurs’ survival is that they didn’t have telescopes. We really stand on top of an immensely privileged position, where evolution has granted us a brain to take us across nature’s many hurdles, and even further, allowing us to make the necessary steps to craft, piece by piece, an inclusive understanding of the functioning of the universe, a truly exhilarating journey that has gotten us this far and will carry us forward even more.
We are a social species. We have always formed group with other members of our race in order to survive, collaborating and organizing our strength towards our common goal. What we always did was organize a raking system, one in which everyone had a part to play in the community, based on skills, will and sometimes violent appropriation of leadership rights. The hunters braved the jungles and forests to kill the game that would provide for the village’s food, same as the farmers, who work the land for whatever crop they could plant in the soil, the craftsmen will do the handiwork when it comes to fitting the people with proper instruments and so on. What we can see from the very earliest of human presence is that through technology we managed to shift the required energy to make or to achieve something from our own, frail body to that of our tools and contraptions, much better suited and designed for whichever task they are appointed for. The pyramids of Giza required thousands upon thousands of slaves to be completed, a huge amount of workforce that was at the whim of one, all powerful monarch-god. They couldn’t have rebelled, they would have been killed and replaced rather quickly. Their dreams of liberty and freedom could not become a reality because they were being held hostage, enslaved laborers who represented for the great Pharaohs the  one and only mean to create their tomb, a gateway to the heavens. How else could they have accomplished such a feat, humans were the most flexible, most adaptable workforce they had at that time. Nonetheless, would they have waited a few thousand years, they would have discovered that there are better, faster and more reliable ways to get what they wanted. The evolution of technology through the millennia has represented this disruptive, empowering force that, breakthrough after breakthrough, demonstrated new and more efficient ways to solve problems then in the past. More importantly, it has been a force which brought a  democratizing empowerment. Technology can never be confined to be used by only a selected few. What will not spread by itself through commerce or scientific confrontation will, someday somewhere, be replicated by another inquisitive mind by sheer experimentation and simple problem solving. This way technology has always permeated across the continents and reached everyone, rich or poor, one day or another, changing their lives. And what was a great endeavor in the past becomes a trivial task in the present. What was at some point something almost magical that commoners saw at a novelty fair would become an integral part of their lives in a few years. As this democratization of the capabilities that technology puts in our reach gradually unfolds, reaching today’s height, we see how technology has always been the turning point around which societies were realigned and reshaped. After a new mean of overcoming old limits drastically outshines the previous one, we see that social change is the inevitable continuation to fit new lifestyles into the new paradigm. With fire we learned to gather around the light for comfort and socialization. With water and air we harvested, processed and exploited a greater quantity of resources. With steam, transportation became a force that transformed the whole landscape and factories churned out a production output that completely disrupted the old manufacturing plants. With each and everyone of these phase shifts, society had to realign its structure to the technology that allowed it to exist. We are, for the greater part, indebted to it for what we are today.
This trend is far from being over. Analyzing the technology-driven disruptions across human history we can clearly see that it has recently accelerated the rate at which new, game changing dynamics supplant old ways of thinking and doing things. What has been accomplished in the last hundred years surpasses in scope the impact of the previous blooming periods of the Renaissance or the industrial revolution. Our society of today has become and intricate web of interconnected, communicating units that bring a much greater meaning to the saying “the whole is greater then the sum of its parts”. It may not look like it but we are also living in the most peaceful period in human history. What makes this sentence sound almost ridiculous? The level at which news get shared and propagate through the aether, now reaching bilions of people all over the world, from any side of the confrontation, encompassing the whole spectrum of ages means we have developed a kind of global conscience that transcends the geographical limits. An emphatic bridge to anywhere in the world is in the hands of anyone who has a smartphone or, more simply, an internet connection. This way we have developed a much more intimate, close to the heart connection to international matters which, in that past, would have transpired as an event in a far away land which wouldn’t have bothered us much. Alongside all this, new research and developments in a host of different fields are bringing, day after day, new astounding results. What a KW of solar energy would have costed in the 1980’s now has plummeted in price by a factor of ten thanks to new photovoltaic technologies and methodologies, in some countries even producing more energy then it can absorb into its grid. The manufacturing revolution brought about by 3D printing technologies has manifested a whole new way of creating useful prototypes to finished, factory grade objects.  New online, social platforms have self developed a security system based on trust and online reputation that is serving as a fantastic regulation model for the interconnected society. Health monitoring devices bring useful data at your fingertips so that one can fight and prevent diseases before they actually occur. Digital, crypto currencies are spreading throughout the web for the commerce of goods and services in a sleek, easy and secure manner. All of these technologies and many more that we did not count here are manifesting what is becoming the pressing, new paradigm of nowadays world: the sharing mentality.
It is now a part of everyday’s routine that of sharing news and information with the entire world. Everyone has access to this stream of information and anyone can participate in it with his/her unique point of view. What is underlining this relatively new dynamic that has become an integral part of everything is that it is starting to show up in areas that we may not have anticipated, and we can foresee that it will affect many more in unprecedented ways. The unbounded sharing of information has granted students and curious all over the world to access education content online, freely, of which quality one would online find in high ranking universities, like the Stanford’s online classroom experiment, which gathered a hundred or so physical attendees and tens of thousands of online students, participating through online lectures and contents (the interesting thing is that the top students for that year where all coming from the online course). Free from the prohibitive traditional education, anyone from any income families all over the world can have a chance to compete with others in the field of choice, in many cases capable of raising above a stagnant situation of unemployment and utter poverty. Entirely in line is the situation of the digital fabrication movement, centered around a sharing ecosystem which benefits from collaborations between creatives and experts as well as the fervent sharing of designs and ideas for a community which is eager to try things out and experiment. Medical data can be shared back and forth between doctors and patients to discuss and address situations which could be solved promptly and, at the same time, provide big data research initiatives to access huge amounts of data points to analyze and develop potentially groundbreaking treatments. The trend is ongoing and popping up where we least expect it. A mind focused on the subject wouldn't go a day without getting awestruck at a new, interesting way to work, produce and get things done in this advanced, collaborative fashion. Science fiction may be hitting the news for its manifestations in the present but we aren’t even close to the potential that these new dynamics may bring in a future that is just around the corner. All we have to do is consider what we have in our hands in technological terms and we can clearly see that there is a patter hidden in its spread and trending history that will revolutionize our society in a way that is similar to the previous technological revolutions, but way more impactful and dramatic. If we consider the energy field, where a great deal is going on at this time, the rising of cheap, increasingly efficient solar energy is met with both excitement and issues. In Hawaii, for example, the production of solar energy through photovoltaic installations is so great that the national grid that is supposed to handle the flux just isn’t prepared for such a massive input. So what’s been their solution? They implemented a restriction which prohibited the installation of new solar panels, in order to avoid having to get up to speed with the current energy production technology in terms of energy grid. The real solution to this problem is being handled by the likes of Elon Musk, who see in the overproduction of energy an opportunity for the future. The recently announced Tesla Wall battery is a practical way to store excess electrical energy to power a home through power outages or to recharge your electric vehicle. The failure of state to tackle these issues is being approached by the private industry, which provides for a way to become self-sufficient, effectively severing the ties to an infrastructure that is no longer up to speed with current terms. The capabilities of 3D printers to reproduce whatever form and shape which is given them in input makes them the perfect protagonist for the sharing ecosystem, a community-enriched mesh of designs and models which are continuously being shared between those who have the ability to digitally design a useful object and those with the possibility to print it out. This way, even those without direct access to knowledge or even the necessary machinery is able to benefit from the digital fabrication revolution and replicate that particular vase that they always wanted or a perfectly fitted pair of shoes that’s tailor made to their feet. Digital manufacturing technologies are bringing a whole new scale of personalization to an always incrementing number of items, easily accessible and relatively cheap to afford, characteristics which the present manufacturing industry can’t hope to match on this level. This unheard of before freedom, to easily put modifiable designs in 3D printers to provide for an immediate need comes as a ringing alarm for an industry which as worked, up to this point, in maximizing production output, drastically limiting its flexibility and agility to cope with different needs from the consumers. Not to worry, 3D printers, of different types and based on different technologies, will definitely take up this mantle and let us be free to get what we want when we want it, providing we have this technological basis to make this happen.
Year after year, new technological instances put the state under the spotlight and poking questions come up out of the collective mind: will it ever become aware of the situation that is becoming all the more palpable? Will it act to serenely allow for this transition to happen? Is it going to be enough? What we are witnessing is a shift from a condition in which the power to manufacture, generate energy, produce food, learn, finance and protect our society is becoming decentralized in a collaborative, sharing manner, a radically different approach from the hierarchical, centralized model through which our society has worked up until now. Technology is giving us the chance to become self sufficient, in almost every aspect of our life, granting the foundation to define a different way of handling the needs of the community, through a mindset which puts its focus on sharing this newly obtained abundance for the benefit of all. We still don’t know how this is all going to play out. Many believe that the current nation-states will oppose with force to the new phase of human social evolution, sinking their nails in the ground to keep the privileged position which has been quite profitable for the few in charge, or maybe simply because the disruptive change is scaring them from taking action. Nonetheless there is movement coming from the private industry, those with the initiative and the funding to explore different directions and their future implications are already betting on this interconnected outcome to become tomorrow’s reality and hoping they will be those to make it happen. But it rests with all of us to decipher this future, to analyze its outcomes in all its different parts, and to gather the necessary knowledge and data to make the right decisions at the opportune time. This is our future we’re talking about, we might as well make the best of it.
